Thousands of our sisters have been active
for many years
in that “large army” of women.
Bertille Kupelian,
a special pioneer in West Virginia,
in the United States,
entered the full-time service in 1958.
In that time, she’s helped
more than 60 people to baptism.
How has her outlook toward the ministry
kept her going for almost 60 years?
My father was opposed
to the truth as I was growing up,
but my mother was very, very zealous.
I knew the things my mother
was teaching me was the truth.
I knew that this was
what I was going to do.
And it was not easy, but we did it.
I was Daddy’s girl,
but my mom made sure
that I and my siblings knew the truth.
And she studied with us
when no other children
in the congregation
had Bible studies at home.
Of course, we kind of kicked
and didn’t like it,
but I was glad she did it.
My mother was a very, very positive person,
and although she had the opposition,
I saw how she dealt with it
and how firm and determined she was.
And that was something she taught us.
It’s a mind-set.
You know,
your mind is a wonderful thing.
It can really influence you
toward good or maybe not so good.
And so then,
I was determined in my mind
that I was going to serve Jehovah then.
In our congregation, there were brothers
and sisters of the anointed.
They were always very kind to me,
and they encouraged me.
I worked in service with them.
And I thought,
‘That’s the way I want to be.’
Children like attention.
And so then, if you give them attention
—you talk with them
and ask if you could work
with them in the ministry
and help them prepare a presentation
and go over it and over it
so that they’re ready for the ministry
—then they’ll enjoy it more.
That was one of the things
that the anointed
did in the congregation where I was.
They paid attention to me, and I loved it.
How I learned to teach
was I think about the person,
and I think about their situation,
and I try to think in my mind
what they are thinking,
and I work on that
and think of what kind of scriptures
I can find to help them.
And so then,
I try to pattern our studies
to incorporate some of those things.
There are always challenges.
Some of the winters right on the lake
where I lived were very harsh.
And my trailer was parked
in such a way that every time
the wind blew
and the snow came and the ice came,
it sealed the door.
And so then, I carried a big knife in my car,
and I would have to cut around the door
to get the door to open
—break the ice seal.
It was interesting.
I had some opposition in the territories,
and one was this lady who was very irate.
And she went to kick me,
and she kicked me right in the stomach,
and so then, anyway,
I dismissed myself.
Then, a while later,
it was time to work the territory again.
Nobody wanted to go there,
and we didn’t have do-not-calls,
I don’t think, at that time,
at least there wasn’t any in the territory.
So then anyway, I called by
and I mentioned to her:
“Why, hello there.
I know I’ve had the opportunity
to talk with you before.”
Yes, she remembered.
And I said, “Well, perhaps
you were having a bad day that day.”
I hit a lull when I had few Bible studies,
and so I prayed diligently to Jehovah:
“Jehovah, help me.
I need Bible studies.”
And then you have to be
out there looking for them.
Well, I’ve lost my father, my mother,
my sister, my brother.
Well, naturally you feel at a loss,
but Jehovah strengthened me,
and the friends strengthened me,
and I kept busy in the ministry.
But again, it goes back to that mind-set.
Are you going to let the challenge beat you,
or are you going to beat the challenge?
You and Jehovah can beat the challenge.
You know, discouragement
is one of Satan’s biggest tools.
And I always tell myself,
‘I’m not going to let Satan beat me down.’
As far as health is concerned,
my everyday health is very good.
But I have a leg that drives me crazy.
I think back to Jacob.
He served Jehovah with a limp.
And then I think of Paul.
And so then, those things keep you humble.
I’ve prayed and prayed and prayed about it,
but just like with the apostle Paul,
it didn’t disappear.
And so then, I just say:
“Patch me up till Armageddon.
It’ll disappear then.”
If your mind is made up
that this is what you’re going to do,
this is your life,
this is what Jehovah wants you to do,
and so then you do it.
I’ve seen how he’s kept me going.
You know that I’ve needed work;
I’ve needed money;
I’ve needed strength.
I’ve needed companionship
because a lot of times
I’m in the ministry by myself.
I talk to Jehovah.
And so then, he’s always there for me.
I definitely want to keep pioneering
or serving Jehovah the best I can,
regardless of what comes up.
There is nothing more joyful
than to see that you have helped
somebody to live forever.
Well, how much better could it be?
Sister Kupelian had a profound effect
on those she witnessed to.
I know this because she found me
in the door-to-door ministry
when I was 14 years old.
At that age, I had the goal to be a doctor.
One night after the meeting,
Bertille said to me,
“Well, you know,
in the new world,
we won’t need doctors
because Jesus will do all the healing.”
Honestly, that hit me hard
because I wanted to help people
as well as provide for my mother.
But she added,
“What we will need are teachers.”
I thought that was a good idea.
Still focused on a career,
I had one type of teacher in mind,
but she had another.
Through her patience and reasoning,
she helped me to become
the most important kind of teacher
—a teacher of God’s Word.
Is there someone like Sister Kupelian
in your congregation?
We are grateful
for these sisters’ zealous spirit
and for the personal interest
they show toward us.
And we’re sure Jehovah
values them like we do.